@metadata {"framework_id": "CA-CCSSM-2013", "subject": "math", "document_title": "Mathematics Framework Summary (2023)", "source_url": "https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/ma/cf/documents/mathfwsummary.pdf", "page": null, "grade": null}


MATHEMATICS FRAMEWORK
for California Public Schools
Kindergarten Through Grade Twelve
Adopted by the California State Board
of Education November 2023
Published by the California Department
of Education Sacramento, 2024
Summary 1
SUMMARY
@page 1
What Is the Mathematics Framework?
The purpose of the 2023 Mathematics Framework for California Public Schools
(Mathematics Framework) is to support the implementation of the California Common
Core State Standards for Mathematics (CA CCSSM). Adopted in 2010 and updated in
2013, the standards put forth the state’s vision for mathematics, kindergarten through
grade twelve (K–12), mapping out what students need to know and be able to do in
math by the end of each grade level. The framework offers guidance for enacting the
standards through curriculum and instructional approaches grounded in research and
reflecting best practices across the globe. The goal is to ensure equity and excellence
in math learning so that all California students become powerful users of mathematics
to better understand and positively impact the world—in their careers, in college, and
in civic life.
@page 2
Why a New Framework?
Given the status of mathematics access and achievement, California and the
United States need to develop new approaches for deepening math learning,
addressing achievement gaps, and modernizing instruction to meet the demands
of a fast-changing world. The US has long rated below the international average in
mathematics on the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), and
scores have declined since PISA began in 2000. Currently, American fifteen-year-olds
score lower than those in 30 other education systems. And California students score
below the US average in mathematics with greatly inequitable achievement outcomes
for historically underserved students of color and those from low-income families.

@page 3
Summary 2

To address the urgency to improve mathematics learning, the framework provides
new guidance for curriculum and instruction that builds on a body of research on
effective mathematics teaching and learning and the successful approaches used
in nations that produce high and equitable achievement in math. Helping students
develop the thinking skills and content knowledge necessary to master the standards
is critical to improving academic performance and creating conditions for later
success. The 2023 Mathematics Framework includes strategies to support educators
to integrate California’s Standards for Mathematical Practice in ways that challenge,
engage, and support all students in deep and relevant math content learning.
Drawing on the experiences of educators who have worked for years to develop
successful strategies for teaching California’s rigorous standards, the framework’s
strategies and practices aim to ensure that all students develop deep skills and a
love of mathematics and that many more choose to pursue a science, technology,
engineering, or math (STEM) major in college or pursue other careers that benefit
from quantitative knowledge and reasoning. Strong mathematical knowledge will
better enable all of California’s students to thrive as citizens in a complex world.
What’s in the Mathematics Framework?
The 2023 Mathematics Framework includes guidance that will help educators
structure the teaching of the state’s rigorous standards around “Big Ideas” that
integrate rather than isolate transitional kindergarten through grade twelve (TK–
12) math concepts—a best practice in high-performing countries. This approach
encourages teachers to think about how the Big Ideas in mathematics connect within
and across grade levels in developmental progressions. It emphasizes developing
the habits of mind and interaction described in the Standards for Mathematical
Practice—for example, persevering in problem-solving, explaining one’s thinking,
and constructing arguments—that students need to become powerful users of
mathematics and better interpret and understand their world.
The framework’s instructional approach connects learning to the “real world” through
authentic examples and the use of data, an approach that not only addresses “Why do
I need to learn this?” but sparks student curiosity and encourages inquiry, problemsolving, and deep learning. The framework also emphasizes students’ need to
have opportunities to explicitly connect their conceptual understanding with facts
and procedures in ways that make sense to them so that they can use known facts,
including those drawn from memory, to determine unknown facts and develop
fluency.
The framework draws on research that illustrates how all students can become
productive mathematics learners and continue their progress through advanced
coursework that can prepare them for STEM and other quantitative careers,
supporting both high achievers and those who may need additional assistance.
The framework encourages schools to enable students to reach higher levels of
mathematics learning through expert teaching focused on deep understanding,
differentiated instruction, personalized learning, strategic grouping, additional
course-taking opportunities, and acceleration into more advanced courses at multiple
junctures when students are ready. It discusses the conditions research has found to
be associated with successful acceleration, and it provides guidance about multiple 

@page 4
Summary 3
strategies, in addition to acceleration, for ensuring that students have the opportunity
to reach advanced mathematics courses, such as calculus and statistics, during high
school.
The framework draws on research that describes how to help students develop
a growth mindset in mathematics, which bolsters perseverance, confidence, and
achievement. It also includes guidance to help educators make mathematics
instruction culturally relevant and empowering, thus allowing students to see
themselves in the curriculum and in math-related careers. The pedagogical strategies
it highlights have been found to promote higher and more equitable engagement
and achievement for students who have been historically underrepresented in STEM
careers, including girls and African American, Native American, Latinx, and Pacific
Islander students. The framework supports instruction for linguistically and culturally
diverse English learners who are developing mathematical proficiency informed by
the California English Language Development Standards (CA ELD Standards) and the
California Department of Education advice for integrating the CA ELD Standards into
mathematics teaching. It incorporates explicit guidance for planning assessment and
instructional materials adoptions that are responsive to English learner needs.
In response to the explosion of data use in our daily lives and across fields, the
framework highlights the opportunities data presents for bringing mathematics alive
for students. It discusses ways to integrate data use into math instruction throughout
the grades and to encourage students to become proficient at understanding and
using data—including helping students use data to make decisions in their roles as
global citizens and identify misleading data so their decisions are sound.
Aligning with State Board of Education guidelines and the CA CCSSM, the framework
details how students can progress through two high school pathways—Traditional
and Integrated—and clarifies the autonomy of local schools and districts in designing
courses and pathways that best meet the needs of local families. The guidance helps
educators integrate and align math concepts taught at the middle and high school
levels, ensure that all high school math pathways are open to all students, and expand
high school math course options to encourage more students to go beyond minimum
course-taking requirements to pursue areas of mathematics that are interesting and
useful to them in their current pursuits and aspirations.
The content of each of the framework chapters is described below.
Chapter 1—Mathematics for All: Purpose,
Understanding, and Connection

@page 5
Chapter 1 introduces and sets up the Mathematics Framework, which lays out the
curricular and instructional approaches that evidence suggests will afford all students
the opportunities they need to learn meaningful and rigorous mathematics, meet
state mathematics standards, access pathways to high-level mathematics courses,
and achieve success. The CA CCSSM were adopted in 2010 and modified in 2013.
The standards map out what California students need to know and be able to do,
grade by grade, in mathematics. Built upon principles of focus, coherence, and rigor,
they hold the promise of enabling all California students to become powerful users 

@page 6
Summary 4

of mathematics in order to better understand and positively impact the world. To
fulfill that promise and reach the goal of deep, active learning of mathematics for
all, the framework is centered around the investigation of Big Ideas in mathematics,
connected to authentic, real-world contexts and taught in multidimensional ways that
meet varied learning needs. While this approach to mathematics education may be a
tall order, research shows that it is the means to both provide access for all students
and teach mathematics effectively. Chapter 1 also provides an overview of how
subsequent chapters are organized.
Chapter 2—Teaching for Equity and Engagement
Chapter 2 focuses on how teachers can create equitable and engaging mathematics
classroom environments, TK–12, that support all students and improve mathematics
access and outcomes. The chapter describes dimensions of the system that
contribute to access and equity and expands on the five components of instructional
design, which are introduced in chapter 1, that encourage equitable outcomes and
active student engagement:
• teaching Big Ideas,
• using open tasks,
• teaching for social justice,
• inviting students’ questions and conjectures, and
• prioritizing reasoning and justification.
Instruction that incorporates these components can enable a diverse group of
students to see themselves as mathematically capable individuals whose curiosity and
love of mathematics learning will be sustained throughout their schooling.

@page 7

Chapter 3—Number Sense
By way of an in-depth discussion of number sense, chapter 3 illustrates how
the progression of mathematical concepts occurs across TK–12 as elementary,
middle, and high school teachers use investigations and connections to teach the
mathematical Big Ideas of each grade level. The chapter shows that number sense
can itself be described as a progression of Big Ideas, which include, for example:
• in transitional kindergarten through grade two, organizing and counting with
numbers;
• in grades three through five, extending flexibility with numbers;
• in grades six through eight, number line understanding; and
• in grades nine through twelve, seeing parallels between numbers and
functions.
The chapter emphasizes the growth of number fluency—the ability to use strategies
that are flexible, efficient, and accurate—and highlights the value of math talks and
games, which encourage students’ mental problem-solving and communication as
well as playful exploration and skill practice.
@page 8

Summary 5
Chapter 4—Exploring, Discovering, and Reasoning
With and About Mathematics
Chapter 4 goes deeply into California’s Standards for Mathematical Practice,
providing an important background for discussing how elementary, middle, and
high school teachers teach the Big Ideas of mathematics (see chapters 6, 7, and 8).
The Standards for Mathematical Practice embed the habits of mind and habits of
interaction—for example, persevering in problem-solving, explaining one’s thinking,
and constructing arguments—that form the basis of mathematics learning. Using
three interrelated Standards for Mathematical Practice for illustration, the chapter
demonstrates how key mathematical practices, integrated with each other, can help
teachers across grade levels create powerful mathematics experiences centered on
exploring, discovery, and reasoning—thus enabling students to develop and deepen
those skills, in relation to progressions in mathematics content, as they move through
the grades.

@page 9
Chapter 5—Mathematical Foundations for Data
Science
This chapter is a first step in helping educators identify how the CA CCSSM can
support K–12 students in developing foundational knowledge and skills for using data
as a tool for mathematical problem-solving. Like number sense, which is discussed
in chapter 3, foundations of data science are embedded in mathematics at all grade
levels. Making sense of data, identifying misleading uses of data, and using data to
make decisions are all important skills for students in their roles as global citizens.
Developing these abilities requires that students generate questions and work with
data beginning in kindergarten (or before). This work should continue and increase
in depth and complexity throughout their school careers. Across all grade levels,
students should be encouraged and supported in understanding and describing
tendencies and variability in data and data distributions; considering data collection,
sampling, and random processes; and comparing distributions and identifying
associations between variables. Students who wish to focus extra attention on data
science should have an opportunity to pursue advanced courses in high school.
Chapter 6—Mathematics: Investigating and
Connecting, Transitional Kindergarten Through

@page 10

Grade Five
This chapter discusses how the approach to mathematics teaching unfolds throughout
elementary school. Mathematics in transitional kindergarten through grade five is a
vibrant, interactive, student-centered endeavor of investigating and connecting the
Big Ideas of mathematics. In these grades, children experience enormous growth in
maturity, reasoning, and conceptual understanding. They develop an understanding
of concepts that include place value, arithmetic operations, fractions, geometric
shapes and properties, and measurement. Building on this deep understanding, they
also develop fluency, including the ability to retrieve and use facts and procedures 
Summary 6
as they undertake more complex topics. The chapter examines how teachers can
use meaningful mathematics activities that nourish curiosity and develop reasoning
skills while simultaneously connecting content and mathematical practices within
and across grade levels. Students who have gained an understanding of elementary
mathematics and enter sixth grade viewing themselves as mathematically capable are
positioned for success in middle school and beyond.
Chapter 7—Mathematics: Investigating and
Connecting, Grades Six Through Eight
This chapter discusses how the approach to mathematics teaching unfolds
throughout middle school. Building on the foundational understanding of
mathematics concepts developed in transitional kindergarten through grade five,
middle school’s major topics include proportional reasoning, rational numbers, and
measurement in geometrical and data science scenarios—all developed through
activities that are situated in intriguing, authentic contexts and require students to
build connections among ideas. The critical element of success continues to be
piquing students’ curiosity and interest through engagement with meaningful and
relevant mathematics activities and experiences. As the chapter discusses, students’
middle school experiences are pivotal in shaping their attitudes toward mathematics
and self-perceptions as mathematics learners. Those experiences, combined with the
guidance they receive, determine whether or not students get on a pathway to highlevel mathematics, crucially affecting their mathematics futures in high school and
beyond.

@page 11

Chapter 8—Mathematics: Investigating and
Connecting, High School
This chapter discusses how the approach to mathematics teaching unfolds throughout
high school. California’s high school mathematics content standards are organized
into conceptual categories:
• number and quantity;
• algebra;
• functions;
• modeling;
• geometry; and
• statistics and probability.
This chapter provides an overview of the traditional and integrated pathways schools
may offer and describes the mathematical content that students learn in the courses
associated with each pathway. It also describes the range of third- and fourth-year
high school mathematics course options from which students may choose to reflect
their interests and future aspirations and clarifies the expectations for coursework
leading to different higher education options, including STEM careers.
Summary 7
Examples are included of how course content can support the Standards for
Mathematical Practice. The pathways integrate content with mathematics practices—
that is, the investigation/connection approach of the framework enables students
to develop a disposition toward reasoning and communication in mathematics,
knowledge of mathematical ideas and skills, and the ability to think both critically
and creatively in solving problems. As this chapter discusses, teaching this way
requires careful consideration of many issues in addition to learning goals, including
motivation, coherence, students’ and teachers’ cultural and linguistic assets, access
and equity, context, and sustainability.

@page 12
Chapter 9—Structuring School Experiences for
Equity and Engagement
Chapter 9 describes methods of teaching and coursework designs that can enable
all students to be appropriately challenged and many more to reach advanced
mathematics—without requiring that all students work on the same mathematics or
be placed in inflexible course sequences that make it difficult for them to move into
or between STEM or non-STEM pathways if they so choose. As with appropriate
course sequencing (described in chapter 8), the goal is to expand access to rigorous
mathematics for all students, allowing each student to experience the joy and
excitement of well-taught mathematics in ways that stimulate their learning and
engagement.
Chapter 10—Supporting Educators in Offering
Equitable and Engaging Mathematics Instruction
Chapter 10 discusses how to plan and design structured, ongoing, high-quality
programs of professional learning that support teachers throughout their careers.
Teaching for equity and engagement is as rewarding as it is complex. Teachers
who focus on Big Ideas and connections and teach mathematics by way of carefully
designed, intriguing investigations see their students come alive through exploration
and discovery. But especially since most teachers did not learn mathematics this way,
they need support to rethink mathematics teaching and acquire skills and strategies
that result in the changes in practice vital to improving student learning.
Chapter 11—Technology and Distance Learning in
the Teaching of Mathematics
This chapter provides guidance to help educators enrich students’ learning of the
mathematics content and practice standards by using technology. Today, a host of
technologies have the potential to support rich and deep mathematical learning
for all students. Introducing students to technology is important in itself, given its
increasingly integral role in our lives. At the same time, this chapter emphasizes that
using technology in teaching mathematics should support instructional objectives
and student learning of mathematics, deeply understood. Based on principles
for technology use in mathematics learning, the chapter recommends adopting
technology in combination with changes to teaching practices that make the 

@page 13
Summary 8
technology an integral and sustained component of the instruction—accompanied by
high-quality, ongoing professional learning for teachers. The chapter also discusses
distance learning, features of effective distance learning, and tips for success.
Chapter 12—Mathematics Assessment in the
Twenty-First Century
This chapter encourages educators, administrators, and policymakers to focus on
assessment that engages students in continuous improvement efforts by using
mastery-based approaches—notably, by assessing with rubrics and using self, peer,
and teacher feedback. Such an approach reflects the goal of achieving conceptual
understanding, problem-solving capacity, and procedural fluency. It also promises
to maximize the amount of learning each child is capable of while minimizing the
sociocultural effects of narrow testing. The chapter discusses California’s evolving
comprehensive assessment system, with its two primary forms of mathematics
assessments—formative and summative—and how they relate to mathematics
instruction and learning. In California as nationwide, mathematics assessment is in
transition, shifting from rote tests of fact-based skills to multidimensional measures of
procedural skills, problem-solving capacity, and evidence-based reasoning. The shift
reflects a growing alignment between how mathematics is being taught and how it is
being tested—in turn reflecting shifting classroom, school, district, and state priorities.
Chapter 13—Instructional Materials to Support
Equitable and Engaging Learning of the California
Common Core State Standards for Mathematics

@page 14

Chapter 13 is directed to the developers and publishers of instructional materials
and conveys information needed to participate in the State Board of Education
instructional materials adoption process. It explains the need for developers and
publishers to provide the content (including coverage, depth, and delivery) to address
standards while at the same time maintaining coherence as learning progresses
across grade levels. Materials need to reflect grade-level shifts in Big Ideas, and
activities need to continue to be relevant to student lives. Resources that bridge
content and context and provide guidance to teachers—while also allowing the
flexibility necessary for supporting all students—will be critical for implementing the
framework. Notably, developers and publishers should consider the lens of equity
when developing lessons and units to serve California’s diverse student population.
The chapter also provides guidance for local districts on the adoption of instructional
materials for students in grades nine through twelve, the social content review
process, supplemental instructional materials, and accessible instructional materials.
Summary 9
Appendix A—Mathematical Progressions within
the High School Pathways and Key Mathematical
Ideas to Promote Student Success in Introductory
University Courses in Quantitative Fields
This chapter presents key mathematical ideas to promote student success in
introductory university courses in quantitative fields.
Appendix B—Works Cited
This appendix lists all references cited in the framework, by chapter.
Appendix C—Vignettes
This appendix contains all vignettes referenced in the framework, by chapter, that are
longer than two pages. Hyperlinks in the chapters give readers easy access to each
vignette.
California Department of Education, June 2023
